Sandberg Kelson is a lawyer and anti-war
activist and the former national
president for veterans for peace I'm
glad to have him there today we're going
to talk about the Ken Burns series of
Vietnam War and we're also going to go
into a lot of US history and and how all
of US history led up to something like
Vietnam so thanks sandy for talking me
today yes sir so starting with Ken Burns
uh you watch the series what did you
what was your take on on how he treated
the Vietnam War okay first let's say
well talk about what Ken Burns said he
was going to do he said there are
multiple truths and he said he was going
to put people on that would give their
their truth he their interpretations
usually interpretations and he said he
wouldn't have any professors or
historians on there he just wanted these
people to give their stories and pretty
much that's what he did now he made the
film not me and of course the fight
would have done it I would add it
altogether different and here's my main
problem with the film was the first
documentary the first hour and he had
Kissinger on there for example I have
two main points Kissinger was one and he
had Kissinger say things like it's time
for the nation to heal over Vietnam
let's talk about healing for a minute
Kissinger is a war criminal
he killed millions of people not only in
Vietnam Indonesia East Timur he was
involved in Chile where tens of
thousands of people were killed so
that's like someone comes in and kills
your family and you catch them coming
out of the house and you know what
happened and then this killer says it's
time to heal it's ridiculous the second
thing about the introduction is he said
that it was a war in good faith by
decent people now if that's believed by
people especially the people that were
interviewed that thought the war was a
good faith effort that's their
interpretation on that belief but if the
war is not a good faith effort a lot of
those people in that movie are just
misinformed and their beliefs are
inaccurate now you need depth of
understanding you need to know a little
bit about history I want to hit some
high points yet European Colonials come
over here to this continent and what
they did was make war on the Native
Americans and they took the land and
committed genocide and the Native
Americans today a lot of them are living
in poverty on reservations at the same
time they shipped in slave labor from
Africa for free work the colonialist
this country got very rich very quickly
based on all that free land all that
reefs or all those resources and free
labor in a way from there it worked so
well I think it set the mode of
operation for this country in the world
a manifest destiny the white man is
meant to rule they're going to help
their little brown brothers and they got
involved in a lot of different countries
with that concept always getting
resources and markets spanish-american
war in the 1890s there were debates
about this the idea was we were going to
help Cuba and Philippines gain freedom
but after the war was over with our
assistance we started occupying those
countries just like Spain had occupied
them and they were debates in Congress
about and some people were the
anti-imperialists were against it saying
you're going to colonize people we're
supposed to be a democracy you can't
have a democracy and have an empire the
debate also said if we had the
Philippines we could control Asia all
those markets would have a strategic
location so we could get the resources
raucous cheap labor of Asia that was
what they are saying and of course
Vietnam is in Asia we took the ye WOM
all necessary for sea power in the
Pacific World War one came up in Woodrow
Wilson said to the American people it's
a war to make the world safe for
democracy
it's a war to end all wars after the war
though in a speech in Ohio I think it
was Canton he said is there any man here
is there any woman here nay is there any
child here who does not know the seeds
of World War one was commercial and
industrial rivalry in other words the
search for profit fueled that war with
the war over he could admit that he had
to lie at the beginning to get people to
support it after World War one we had a
famous Marine General Smedley Butler
wait hang on one second just just to
stick on World War one for a second you
want to talk about the the creel
Commission a little bit and how that
helped how that helped spread war
propaganda stir the American people
prior to World War one elected Wilson on
his pledge to keep America out of that
war however as soon as he became
president he wanted to get into that war
but the American people were pacifists
they didn't want to get into that war so
he started a propaganda campaign guy
that chaired it was a guy named creel it
actually used advertising techniques
developed by Bernays a relative of
Sigmund Freud and Sigmund Freud I mean
Bernays his first job he was a
psychologist was for Lucky Strikes they
said we want a bigger market and he he
got the bigger market by approach to
women and said you know you shouldn't
you're not supposed to smoke men have
the liberty to smoke but you don't you
should smoke you should get Liberty and
Lucky Strikes he called Liberty sticks
so he's selling a harmful product
cigarettes under the concept of being
liberated and that works so well the
crew
Commission did the same kind of things
about World War one and the American
people supported World War one after
that advertising campaign yeah so you
would you were gonna go and talk about
Smedley Butler he's as I thought
yeah gonna go after World War one the
United States was involved in Wars
throughout Latin America and we had
penetration of China and Smedley Butler
was a famous Marine general who every
person that goes through marine boot
camp learns off because he had two
medals of Honor highly decorated marine
when he retired he was the highest
ranking general in the Marine Corps and
he and bitter reflection of his entire
career came out and said he was a high
class muscle man for Wall Street that he
was a racketeer for capitalism and he
went through all the different countries
where he served and explained how he
made one country say free United Fruit
Company another one for the Brown
Brothers banking industry and so on so
we're still doing the same thing we did
at the beginning with four we're trying
to get resources labor and power and
then after that you know we had World
War two and I would suggest that it had
nothing to do with being anti-fascist it
had to do again with military power
economic power resources things like
that after World War Two as we're
getting closer to our involvement in
Vietnam Eisenhower was president during
a lot of this we also invaded Iran and
not we didn't invade but we had
engineered a coup d'etat against the
democratically elected leader guy named
they SMO Sadiq and we installed the Shah
of Iran the next royal family member of
that country who was a cruel dictator
kill
tens of thousands of his own people and
tortured them we did that for the
resource of oil in conjunction with
Britain
so we destroyed a democracy for profit
and then there was boredom all same
thing a democratically elected leader we
overthrew him for United Fruit Company
so they could have more land and the
time that the results of that was world
was over there were hundreds of
thousands of Guatemalans killed so
that's our history
so when we know that history and someone
says it was in good faith you got to
stand that up and compare to the history
I just related in a nutshell
that's important so now Eisenhower was
president
and he was told by the CIA that if the
Geneva Accords the treaty signed by
Vietnam and France after France
unsuccessfully tried to take its colony
Vietnam back after World War two that if
those elections in that treaty provided
for by that treaty took place ho chi
minh would win and the problem with Ho
Chi Minh for the United States was he
was a communist so much for democracy
the u.s. sabotage those elections and
set up what it called a republic in
South Vietnam South Vietnam was not two
countries it was one country that was
still being unified by these elections
we called them off and then we started
sending men in with guns right and the
history of the war in Vietnam that was
covered I think quite adequately in that
movie and that was a major part of it
was battles and not the political
situation that caused it those
interpretations of people who believed
it was in good faith based on what I
call a truth I mean there's so much
evidence that the things I'm saying are
true if those interpretations are wrong
well then
documentary had at least 50% I don't
know 60% of people who were giving their
truth there based on a fiction so that's
what my whole issue is with the Ken
Burns documentary right well you wrote
in your article you wrote about
something up on very interesting you
want to talk about policy planning study
23 yes that confirms exactly what I've
been talking about that was by a State
Department official named Kenan he
drafted a policy that was approved by
Congress in secret the American people
never heard of it in which he said that
the United States find itself in a very
enviable position at the end of World
War two it had I believe and my figures
will be off a little bit maybe 3% of the
world's population but we controlled
over I think 25 percent of the world's
economy the wealth of the world and he
said that makes a lot of people envious
that you know we're controlling so much
of the world's economy and of course it
was through again military and economic
power and Kenan said so therefore we
have to forget about talking about
democracy and freedom and liberty and
human rights and we have to start
operating in I forget his exact words
but with strong-arm tactics to keep and
expand that disparity in other words to
steal more wealth from the rest of the
world but they still used when they
talked to the American people in the
world to justify all this the words
democracy and freedom blah blah blah
again just like the real Commission in
the history I gave it it's just so
parent that to us is trying to construct
the world's economy through economic and
military power for the benefit of the
United States and they always justify it
with platitudes
that don't meet reality so let me just
say this to people who are hearing this
and I know people listen your show
probably agreed I would hope before that
mean well a lot of Americans cannot
accept what I am saying because like
every country people are indoctrinated
at the very as soon as we have cognitive
abilities we're being told we're
exceptional the Germans called it the
master race
faint concept is the Nazis is the master
race were exceptional to use power and
economy to get whatever we wanted so
people who are unfortunate and don't
understand what I'm talking about and
it's very hard to break out of
indoctrination when they say these
things they're horrifying
they can't believe it and all I can say
to them you know and they can vilify me
or wherever they want it it doesn't take
a whole lot to research this and verify
what I'm saying
so those people that were being
interviewed if they have that
indoctrination in them and they've never
searched it to test it to figure it out
well yeah that's why they're saying
there's so many truths about the Vietnam
War so the first thing that you have to
get into a documentary like that which
is what burns did not want to do is get
this history sorted out and motives
sorted out how do you estimate it if you
call off Alexis I think you're hidden
somewhere by the motive if you install a
republic in the country you have no
right to be in that's a motive so that's
my main gist of what I believe about
this documentary once you talk do you
want to talk a little bit about the
actual government of South Vietnam and
then not show the United States actually
started the Republic and they quickly
called off the elections under our
leadership diem was a Vietnamese living
and knew
Jerzy at the time and I think he was in
a monastery his Catholic and we shipped
him over to Vietnam where he had some
backing and installed him as a leader
and there were corrupt elections where
he got like 96% of the vote
they were fraudulent the thing to
understand when you hear about a
Catholic leader in the Buddhist country
is that France had occupied Vietnam for
a hundred years brought two flawless ISM
to Vietnam and they were the colonial
masters of that country the Vietnamese
people were basically slaves to help the
economy of France and what France did
there were Cui's links people that did
not stay loyal to the Vietnamese people
but took up the French position and
served the French and they were
well-paid for that assistance the United
States saw fit to put a French speaker
the Catholic in charge of a Catholic
country he had an independent mind
though and he was doing a lot of things
the u.s. didn't like and eventually the
United States said Kennedy said he's got
to go and a coup was approved by
President Kennedy and he left and then
there were a series of different leaders
mostly military types that the United
States had a big hand in deciding who
they would be military leaders and the
people they refused to let into that
position the power were those people who
wanted to have peace negotiations with
North Vietnam in the early 60s that
wouldn't do again that's a big
interference with a country if you have
people are want to get in office to
negotiate a peace that means sharing
power with communist we won't let them
have power we were going to decide
how that fake country was going to act
in it in that situation oh can I say
something I just thought of something
yeah of course if you want to talk about
whether or not the United States had
good-faith motives okay and what Ken
Burns said is that those good-faith
motives degenerated over the years of
our involvement in Vietnam had something
to do with the President Johnson Nixon
not wanting to go down in history is the
first person to lose a war so millions
of Vietnamese and tens of thousands of
Americans had to die for that
so we destroyed the country Asian horns
third and fourth generation children are
still being born badly deformed they
look like they have arthritis of their
arms and legs they're all contorted and
twisted you have Cyclops children with
one eye in the middle of their head they
can't talk they can't see themselves
they can't do anything that's because of
Agent Orange poisoning the jungle to
take away the shelter of Canada the
camouflages of the trees and to poison
rice and the the the whole ecosystem is
polluted because of it if we had good
faith and we think oh it was a mistake
we ought to be in there doing something
about it and basically we're just
cleaning up one military base daaang
probably because we intend to use it
there are a lot of things that we could
have done to do good to correct what we
call a mistake but we didn't do those
things I think you can test whether or
not the beginnings were in good faith
and if we veered from that path and we
now say it was a mistake well let's do
something about it you want to heal well
healing has to be not just with
Americans but with the Vietnamese too if
we did wrong let's fix it somewhat so I
think the good faith part of that film
is what really angers me yeah I'm a
little passionate about it no he should
be you should
uh what about how do you how did you
feel about how he treated anti-war
activism and and issues like that in the
series yeah you know I have to give him
a long lease because it's his
documentary I wouldn't have taken the
anti-war thing as casually as he had and
and he had one woman apologize for
calling soldiers baby killers and what's
that mean that one woman apologized
you know the anti-war movement relied on
soldiers and veterans they were at the
front of every demonstration or parade
the veterans went right up front they're
working with anti-war demonstration I
don't think you can realize that from
the way burners displayed it you still
talk to students about these issues yes
I talk to everybody about the issue so
tell us a little bit of how what what
can we do to try to change things it
seems like we're up against it seems
like we're back where we started where
we were before Vietnam maybe after
Vietnam there was a little period of
self-reflection but now we're we're back
in the same war so what what what you
done yeah what you just said is true you
know going back to kitchen and saying we
have to heal while we're doing the same
thing that we did in Vietnam in other
countries in the Middle East you can't
heal when you still being the current
war criminal that we are you can't do it
but with the students I taught in the
honors course at Allegheny College it
was for high school students who had
always honor roll students special
program and I taught the lessons of the
Vietnam War
ayuh quite a few interesting experiences
there one of my favorite and first
thought the kids loved the course my
class is filled up very very quickly and
the children were enthusiastic and it
was an enjoyable experience and I tell
him at the very beginning I said you
know a lot of teachers will
their objective and that they don't have
a position and I said that is not true
they're either lying to you or lying to
themselves if you study something long
and hard enough to be a teacher you've
got to have a bias we all have them and
I want you to know what my bias is a lot
of people say the war was justified a
lot of people say it was a mistake and I
call it a war crime so I let them know
my position and I said now you guys may
have parents or relatives that served in
Vietnam and they may have a different
bias than me and I invite them to come
to this class and speak to you they will
be treated as an honored guest
so this one girl told me to call her
uncle that he wants to come and I said
that's great I talked to him on the
phone and he I invited him in and he
said that he had been spat on in
California at the airport when he came
back from Vietnam and I said is that
right I said was it a man or a woman who
spat on him and he got flustered and he
fumbled his words and he finally said I
can't tell all those hippies look alike
yeah now I'm testing his credibility a
little bit so I told him about the book
by Jerry Lemke professor that wrote a
book called the spitting image what he
did was he collected all the stories
from soldiers who say they had been spat
on and he sent students studying either
for masters or PhDs to those locations
they searched this usually at an airport
and search for incident reports at the
airport if there are private security
companies he searched their records he
searched the newspapers he searched the
tell TV records police records
everything and they could not find one
spitting image that was reported at the
time that is supposedly had occurred and
the spitting image didn't get started
until after a Rambo movie
when Rambo said he had been spat on
interestingly the Germans had the same
story after World War one they lost it
and they said they were being spat on
and lengthy fear arises as a psychology
professor that the soldiers don't want
to acknowledge that they may have been
beaten in a war that they weren't macho
enough to win they want to blame the
loss on others and that means in certain
circumstances the feminine nature of our
society because it's always the women
who are doing the spitting hmm and not
men and you know men spit more than
women women don't hardly spit I'm not
saying they don't but it's not a common
thing is you would tank so I told this
guy about the book and I sent the book
to him before he came to the class as
well as our textbook he spoke to the
class Oh
before the class 30 said sandy I got to
talk to you and he said sandy I have to
tell you something I was I was wrong I
was not spat on I heard about over and
over again and I was upset about losing
the war and I really thought I had been
spat on I just internalized it from
hearing it over and over again when I
told you I was spat on I really believed
that he said but it didn't happen
what a man to be able to admit that hmm
so he gave a presentation of class and
what was kids questioned him and when
they got done I said I have a couple
questions I said when you joined to go
to Vietnam and you joined the military
no one you wanted to go to Vietnam did
you know American leaders lied about why
we were going to Vietnam he said no I
didn't I said when you were over there
did you know Americans lied to justify
that warrant to continue that war and he
says no I didn't and I said when you
came home did you find out that you had
been lied to
he says no I said do you know now you've
been lied to he says yes and I said when
and why he said well you sent me that
text book and I read it and I even
researched further what the book said
were lies of the Vietnam War and I now
believe we were liked it so here's a man
in his sixties who finally figured that
an amazing man to be able to acknowledge
that in front of other people like my
students and myself and his niece an
amazing experience and the other thing
how do you make change well I live in a
very conservative area and in Coralville
I'm an advisor to Clinton said
Pennsylvania is Philadelphia in the East
Pittsburgh in the West and Alabama in
between I live in the part that he
called Alabama and they have a County
Fair every year and I applied to have a
booth for veterans for peace in the
first year I didn't get it
and I told them that I saw the VFW or
the American Legion had a booth there
and I expected to have a booth next year
and I did get that booth and I had a
sign up and the sign said one two or
three women in the military are raped
and that was a conclusion of a US Army
Medical Corps study and I had the
citation to that study under that sign
county commissioner comes and says you
got to take that sign down I said no
it's not coming down and I think since
you're an elected representative that
you would be happy to have that truth
known to people here so that the
children who join the military
especially the women know of that risk
why would you want to hide that risk
rate from your electorate and he said if
you don't take it down we're going to
kick you out I said well if you kick me
out I'm going to sue you and at that
there was a woman next to me so on
tubberware
she came over and she said to this guy
it almost brings tears to my
now just talking about it she said
listen I was in the Air Force for four
years I was gang-raped and the command
pooh-poohed it and didn't do very much
about it that sign is right that shine
sign should stare and the kind of
Commissioner left with his tail between
his legs and we stayed there with our
signs so there's all kind of things you
can do like that we had a Veterans Day
Parade in that time and it was an
anti-war parade it was a great thing to
do in a small very conservative
right-wing Republican town and one that
came up to me he was crying he had two
buddies with and he said you don't know
what they did to us over there and I
said well I am not too interested and
what they did tell us over there as much
as I am and what they did to us before
we landed money and men in their country
with guns in their hand what did they do
to us the answer is nothing of course so
these are the kind of things that you
know I do at one parade they had a
Junior ROTC from an inner-city school
and there was a big sergeant 6-foot some
beautiful specimen of a man in a uniform
and after these kids marched through the
parade they were at the end hanging I
waiting for something I don't know what
they're just hanging there and I I
brought him over an illustrated copy of
a book called addicted to war explaining
the things that I talked about at the
beginning of this show and the sergeant
saw it and said can I have one of them
and I said sure I gave him one and he
called the formation all these kids were
standing he says I'm going to walk by I
want these books mm-hmm and I looked at
the group and I got in front of him and
I said you may have had this already in
school I don't know but if you didn't
you will there
countries that don't trust their
citizens there are countries that burn
books to keep their citizens ignorant so
they don't know what's going on your
sergeant is burning books collecting
these books and he said to me there's a
time and place for everything in front
of the kids I said that's right and the
Supreme Court said in the streets is the
time and place to exercise your First
Amendment right which I am doing and you
are a government servant and you are
violating that First Amendment by
interfering with my First Amendment I
don't know if these kids will remember
that or not I find out where their buses
were and I put those books on every
seating the bus I did this passing am i
at an inner-city school I I'm getting
this little redundant but the principal
came and told me I couldn't do it to get
off the sidewalk it's private property I
said no no the sidewalk is public
property she said I'm going to call the
police I said that's fine he's going to
come here he's going to ask me what I'm
doing he's going to see what I'm doing
he's going to walk away and tell you
that I'm not doing anything wrong and
that's what happened and a lot of the
kids that went into the school didn't
want the books some of them took it
looked at her and threw it on the ground
and the kids are still coming in and I
said to him your principal called the
police on me she doesn't want you
reading these books they went into
school told the kids in the school those
that didn't have books didn't take them
but those who threw them away came out
they all wanted them things she do oh
that's cool I'm glad we have to hear
both about you know a lot of the history
that you studied over the years but then
also a lot about your experiences you
know actually talking to people and and
trying to let people know you know some
of these facts is there anything you
wanna you want to add at the end just to
tell people what I would like to do is
thank you
because in America so much of our
conversation is sand bites and they're
all predictable sideways
and the problem is that we talk in sign
bytes because we don't have the depth of
understanding it's necessary to expand
what we're saying or listening to you
gave me a chance
I spoke quickly because I wanted to get
a lot in you can't explain this stuff
with sound bytes and you gave me the
opportunity and I thank you well I
appreciate you talking I think it's uh
it's always great to hear somebody who's
had a lot of experience you know talk
about their life and what they did so
thank you very much for talking okay
thank you this is our hidden history
you